---
title: "Embedded Linux Distributions"
categories:
    - blog
tags:
    - Embedded
    - Linux
    - Distro
    - Distribution
    - Cost
    - Energy Efficient
---

Popular desktop Linux distributions are typically too large for embedded
devices. Distros like Redhat, Ubuntu, CentOS, etc. are built for the desktop
(and servers) and include many applications, services and libraries that are
normally not needed for embedded devices. Programs like a desktop environment,
email clients, and web browsers and their related libraries take up alot of
storage space and are not needed for most embedded applications.

The embedded device that you work with has specific requirements and features.
Your applications only need the operating system (OS)[^1] support to implement
those features, and nothing else. The less software you write, the less
storage, RAM and CPU performance that will be needed, which lowers cost of your
product. This is particularly important for consumer devices that have embedded
devices in them.

In the past, developers had to use RTOSes to achieve the real-time constraints
imposed by the limited performance of micro controllers and other components.
Today, Linux has become a viable option because of the improved performance of
MCUs and lower cost of RAM and storage components like NAND and eMMC.

Developers prefer Linux because of the great number of tools and libraries
available to them from the Open Source community. The like the ability to add
new features and fix bugs without being at the mercy of vendor's release
cycles. Companies like Linux because of the lower cost of ownership (no
licensing fees).

Today, component vendors typically provide Linux drivers only instead of
supporting many different OSes. This is much more cost effective and inline
with their business model.

SOC vendors support a Board Support Package (BSP)[^3] that typically includes
the bootloaders, a kernel for the SOC and maybe a root file-system reference or
Yocto layers for their SOC. This is much more cost effective for the vendors
and requires much less maintenance on their part.

[^1]: [Operating System](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Operating_system)
[^2]: [RTOS](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Real-time_operating_system)
[^3]: [BSP](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Board_support_package)


<!---

Notes:

One sentence premise: Embedded Linux is now viable. Popular distros are not
suitable.

In the past not viable because...

Now, OK and preferred.

Linux has:

- Low cost of ownership
- Large number of libraries and other open source code
    - In the beginning, FOSS was buggy and costly to maintain. Not
      necessarily lower cost of ownership. Now different. Most important
      FOSS is mature
- Shell. Embedded device can be used by the developers like a desktop PC to
  code, debug, script, log, etc. Not need to develop of by IP stack, for
  example, like you had to do for VxWorks, FreeRTOS. No need to use NAND
  without a file-system... Etc.

- What's the difference?
- How popular is EL? Show data.
- Building blocks:
    - Bootloaders:
        - first level bootloader
        - second level bootloader
    - kernel to memory
    - kernel initialization sequence
    - user space


- Vendors use to support many RTOSes. 
- Vendors use to create and support their own RTOSes.
- Vendors use to create and support their own embedded Linux distros
- Component vendors only need to support device drivers
- SOC vendors only need to support BSP (1st, 2nd level bootloader, device
  drivers)


--->
